---
layout: default
title: Outline
---

h1. Olympia Software Craftsmanship Workshop

Saturday, June 6th, 2009, 10am-4pm
"[Location TBD]":http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&source=s_q&hl=en&geocode=&q=olympia,+wa&ie=UTF8&z=12&iwloc=A, Olympia, WA

h2. Overview

The Olympia Software Craftsmanship Workshop is a free, one day workshop,
developed with the intention of increasing the level of awareness of practices
and skills that can improve our software.

Any developer interested in improving and learning new skills is welcome.

We're going to focus on a scenario for a feature a customer wants. We'll do it
first using classic ASP.NET techniques. We'll show how it's difficult to maintain,
extend, and test.

Next, we'll use the techniques to componentize business functionality, extracting
it from the code behind in the ASP.NET project. 

We'll then add a new feature to the application, using our tests to make sure
nothing has been broken in the process.

We'll finish off by going over some other tools and techniques that can augment
what we've discussed.

h2. User Stories

The theme we're going to concentrate on is...TBD

 _ideas_ _please_

p[color:gray]. NOTE: I have started a little sample app I used for my spark view engine
presentation. It's based on my vast 3 months of experience in the mortgage
servicing industry. I kind of understand enough about that industry to make
decent stories. Problem is:
* Not sure if this is something that would connect with the audience
* We're realistically only going to have time for about two stories anyway,
  so is it worth it to spend about 10 minutes introducing this niche domain?

p[color:gray]. I'd really like to have some kind of government example, like something from
L&I or something.

h2. Principles

The principles we want to focus on are:

* Using User Stories and TDD to focus on real customer value
* Refactoring legacy code to make it testable *before* adding new features
* "S.O.L.I.D.":http://blog.objectmentor.com/articles/2009/02/12/getting-a-solid-start
* "INVEST":http://xp123.com/xplor/xp0308/index.shtml
* "Individuals and interactions over processes and tools":http://agilemanifesto.org/

h2. First Cut

We're going to do a first cut just building a plain old ASP.NET web forms 
application.

We'll think about the first scenario in the stories, not considering the second
story.

We'll create a web form with a "master detail view":http://designingwebinterfaces.com/designing-web-interfaces-12-screen-patterns, 
add a data source control, wire it with SQL in properties and all.

Next we'll look at adding the second scenario and show how it's difficult with
the poor design we've slapped together.

We'll consider things like extracting the SQL into a stored procedure and other
steps we might take to get this under control, and discuss the pros and cons of
each approach.

h2. Refactoring

We'll use the safe refactorings outlined in "Michael Feathers":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0131177052/ref=s9_sims_c2_s1_p14_i2?pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_s=center-2&pf_rd_r=0S8D0VHK1WGVWC6Q21Q7&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_p=470938631&pf_rd_i=507846
book to build seems and make the code we have so far testable.

First, we'll pull the data access code out of the ASPX page and into a service.
We'll have the code behind be responsible for creating the service and satisfying
any dependencies it has.

Next we'll discuss what's wrong with having the code behind be responsible
for creating the service and we'll look at some things we could do the address
those issues.

Once we have tests around the existing application - at least the part we are 
working on - we can move onto the next feature.

h2. TDD

We'll build another feature from scratch using TDD. We'll write the tests for
the code we wished we had then implement the feature.

h2. Other Practices
 * One-Step Builds
 * Continuous Integration
   - TeamCity
   - Hudson
 * Agile Estimation